Let's keep going on this topic
of keyboard-only users, and
all the great things that we can do.
And here's where I think we get into the
most fun engineering tasks for the next
little bit of a section, cuz we can build
some really cool things for people.
So, the idea being,
your entire application should be usable
with only the keyboard,
all of your forms, your buttons, etc.
You should have some type of focus
indicator to provide a necessary clue as
to the currently active item,
where you are on the page.
And you should consider offering
an any kind of shortcuts for
keyboard-only users to jump
quickly to the main content,
which we often call a skip link, and
we'll show some cool examples of those.
So WebAIM's recommendations here is,
when elements receive focus,
they don't make a substantial
change to the page.
So again, like pop up windows or changing
keyboard focus or anything like that.
Make sure that you don't do anything that
could confuse or disorient the user.
When a user inputs information or
interacts,
it doesn't result in substantial changes.
So again, we're a little bit just trying
to think of good design principles here
that, as you tabbing around the page,
shouldn't be shifting and moving or
anything like that.
As you open a modal,
it shouldn't necessarily change out
the entire background, things like that.
And then navigation links that
are repeated, they don't change order,
so again,
this is just a good UX principle.
But if you have a set of ten links at the
top, let those be the same on every page.
Because oftentimes, screen reader users or
keyboard-only users will
skip the navigation section.
So if it's inconsistent, and then they
go back to it, and it's different,
that can cause confusion.
Great, so keyboard shortcuts,
these are one of my favorite things to
build whenever I work on new websites.
Website social networks like Twitter and
Facebook and
YouTube offer really cool shortcuts.
These are great for accessibility
purposes, they're great for power users,
and they're great for people who like Vim.
They're really fun to build and really
nice for people to use, so, some examples,
if you go to any of your favorite
social media websites and
hit question mark or shift question mark,
you'll get these popups.
So I think I took these from like
Twitter and Facebook and YouTube, but
most websites have these.
So you load the page, you hit shift
question mark or question mark, and
you get this keyboard shortcut.
And the idea here is it should have a big
list of common actions that you would want
to take.
I guess maybe a show of hands,
how many people have used keyboard
shortcuts on popular websites before?
All right, Vim users maybe, yeah,
cool, so a lot of people don't,
I get really addicted to them when
I kinda figure it out cuz it's just
really fast to hop to the timeline,
send up a new message or whatever.
Similarly, this is Facebook, so you just
go and you hit question mark, and it pops
up this big keyboard shortcut window, and
then YouTube has a really similar one.
So it's just a nice accessibility thing
that's there on all your favorite
websites, but
maybe you haven't noticed before.
Skip links, these are another foundational
concept is that websites are often
structured with a big header, and
the header stays the same on every page.
And that header is usually full of
tabbable items, like links, and
if you imagine being a keyboard-only user,
every time you go to a new page,
you'd have to tab through all 28 of your
header links to get to the main content.
And so skip links are a concept where
if you've just refreshed the page, and
you hit Tab for the very first time,
they inject a secret extra link into the
HTML that's called skip to main content.
And if you interact with that, then you
jump down into the main container, and
if you tab past it, then you can
freely use the links like normal.
And so, these are really great, they're
quite easy to build, but they're very nice
for people, and these are very common
on news' websites, for example.
So if you go to BBC and you load a page,
and then right when you've hit refresh for
the first time you hit Tab, you'll notice
this little skip to content link shows up.
This is true on GitHub as well,
you load GitHub.com and then hit Tab, and
you'll get this skip link
kind of embedded in there.
And you hit space or
click on it or whatever, and
it'll jump you to the main bit of content,
let you skip right over the navigation.
So, the idea with a skip link is
pretty easy, you make an anchor, and
it should be the first
anchor in your list,
and it's got the body,
skip to main content, or skip.
Make sure it's prepended to your website,
AKA make sure it's the first
tabbable item that there is.
Make it visually hidden,
use the class that we used before, and
then on focus state, make it visually
visible, and it's quite easy to do.
So yeah, you basically just add
an anchor hover, hide it visually, but
make sure with your CSS selector that the
on focus selector is visual, not hidden,
and then it'll show up there.
And make sure that the link itself is
an internal anchor to your container ID,
like a hash anchor to whatever, main, or
whatever you call your main container.
Cool, so yeah, WebAIM compliance here,
links are provided
in some way to skip navigation and
other page elements that are repeated.
So just any structure, it doesn't
even need to be visually hidden,
it could just be there, your first link
could just be skipped to navigation.
And then proper structure of a page
might be considered sufficient, so
here I think it's saying that having
a good heading structure of H1S and
things like that may well be
sufficient without a skip link.
Cuz as we saw before, we could use
something like the web rotor and
just skip through H1S.
But if you have a lot of repeated links
that are hard to navigate through,
a skip link can be a really
great way to do it.
And also related things,
making sure the webpage itself
has an informative page title.
So that's like the title tag in HTML and
that the navigation is logical and
intuitive.
So again, a lot of these are just
kind of good design principles, but
the skip link itself is a very
fun to build, easy to build and
really powerful tool for
keyboard only users.
Cool, so keeping the story going with tab
navigation, we hinted at this a little bit
earlier when we did the exercise
of building the button with a DIV.
But the idea being that you need to be
able to use the tab key to navigate to
the next tabbable item and shift tab to
navigate to the previous tabable item.
So this is the way that the web works
by default in all major browsers, but
we do have some cool
control as developers here.
So the requirement here is that all
page functionality is available using
the keyboard.
So making sure that there aren't any
things that are out of reach for
keyboard only users.
Suggestions here that you can add shortcut
keys, but make sure that they don't go
conflict with existing browser and
screen reader shortcuts.
So the examples here being usually
I think we stick to the same set
of keys which are largely influenced
by vim and other keyboard.
Heavy things, so using, what is it?
Like H and J to go up and down,
things like that, just make sure
that you're not binding any helpful
keyboard shortcuts to escape caps lock,
control, anything that might
be necessary for other things.
Again, the compliance thing here is
that make sure that AAA compliance,
everything can be available
using the keyboard.
But for A compliance, everything can
be available using the keyboard,
unless it's something that can't
be accomplished in any known way.
So you can be A and AA compliant,
let's say you have a drawing app or
something like that.
You don't need to make the entire
drawing app itself keyboard accessible.
You just need to make everything that
can be done with a keyboard done with
the keyboard.
How are we feeling about that?
Pretty good?
Cool, so what are tabbable elements?
So the tabbable elements in HTML are
anchors, buttons, inputs, selects, text
areas and iframes, so these are things
that come with default functionality.
They register themselves as tabbable,
and then as a user is tabbing or
shift tabbing through a website,
they can interact with these things.
So most of these, or all of these are
items where there will be some user input
required in some way, whether it's
an anchor that a user clicks on or
an input that a user enters information,
or an iframe that a user hops in between.
There's a reason these are tabbable
because they mark points where a user
would need to interact with them.
Just a quick shout out, I really don't
care if people use this or not, but
if you are making a list of all of your
focusable or tabbable elements, and
you want to have that in a CSS selector,
I have this very simple JavaScript library
that just exports a simple string
of all tabbable HTML elements.
Because while this list has the main ones,
there are actually hundreds of sub
tabbable elements like input type, emails,
or all sorts of things with ARIA
attributes or tabbable attributes.
And so I have this little open source
repository here, jcoop/focusable, and
it's literally just a string of every
modern tabbable element that you can use
in a number of ways when you're
building accessibility features.
So what if we have an element
that we wanna be interactive, but
it's not tabbable?
And we covered this a little
bit with the button before, so
there is a tab index attribute
that you can add to any element.
And so if you take a div, and
you add tabIndex 0 to it,
then all of a sudden you refresh the page,
and you start tabbing through the page,
and you will focus on this div, and it'll
get a focus state like it was an input,
and it will show up, and
the screen reader will read it.
The screen reader will not read a role
assigned to it until you assign an ARIA
role, but it will read it and treat it
as a focusable interactive element.
Has anybody used tabindexes
before on their website?
Cool, people have, that's great,
yeah, really exciting.
So tabindex has three values,
it has a negative value, which means that
the element should be focusable but not
reachable through sequential navigation.
Meaning, if you think of
when you load a page,
it basically crawls
every tabbable element,
and it puts them in a list together,
and then as you tab, it goes next.
And as you shift tab, it goes previous,
a negative value means we still want this.
We wanna be able to call like with
JavaScript, call, focus on it,
but we don't want the user to be
able to access it with the keyboard.
Maybe a little bit more rarely to use
this one, the more common one is 0.
So 0 means the element
should be focusable,
it should be reachable via navigation, and
its relative order should be defined where
it falls in the dom, basically, right?
So if it's the first element, like a div,
and you add tabIndex 0 to it,
it'll be the first thing there.
I realize that wording is a little bit
complex, does that make sense though,
that 0, tabbable, focusable, and
it'll just show up in the order in which
it appears in the markup, essentially.
And then a positive value
means it should be focusable,
reachable through the keyboard navigation.
But now its relative order is defined
by the value of the attribute,
kind of like Z index, right?
Where the higher it is,
the higher it shows up.
Okay, so this is possible,
this is supported, this is standard, but
it is very much not recommended.
So the W3C and MDN recommend
that you only use 0 and -1, So
you can have it focusable and
not navigable, or focusable and navigable.
But don't use these positive integer
values because they can mess with so
many different types of navigation, and
they can make things very confusing for
screen readers.
So it is possible it is supported,
Just got a big red warning on it to stick
with the zeros and
the negative ones where possible.
I don't think I've ever used a positive
value in production, I use the negative
one very rarely when I have something that
I want to be able to draw focus to later,
but isn't really something
to be interacted with now.
And I use the zero by far the most often
to just turn something into a tappable
element.
Cool, so as we're building
these accessibility features,
there's a really nice API that's
important for a lot of them,
which is the document active element.
And so on single page applications,
I often come up with a lot of
different use cases for
storing the currently focused element.
So one that I'll give you is
there's this pretty common design
workflow that you have in your app,
and it's got a list of things, and
you're tabbing through news articles or
something like that.
Then you interact with something that
pops up a modal, like a login modal or
like view the article in details modal or
something like that.
When you close the modal,
the ideal experience is that you send the
focus right back to where it was before.
Or otherwise, the users will have
to start at the top again and
navigate all the way down.
So it's actually really easy to do where
when you trigger the modal in JavaScript,
before you change anything,
you store the currently active element,
document an active element.
And then when the modal closes, you just
call .focus on it, quite simple APIs.
So anytime that you're dealing with these
page transitions or something pops up and
you just wanna make sure that
the user remains in their place.
I think we've all been there before,
you're on a social site, and
then you click on something,
then you hit the back button, and
it takes you back to the top, and
you've lost your feed or whatever.
This is really easy to solve with code,
so on click, store the current active and
then on close, call .focus on it,
and it takes you right back there,
exactly like you would expect.
Cool, I think the last concept we
talked about skip links and navigation,
all this stuff, tabbable elements,
is this idea of tab trapping.
This is another one that I think these big
professional websites almost always do,
and as a user you would expect it to
be there, but it's not necessarily
something that you would think of
when building your application.
And the idea is best described with
a modal pop up, so like a login modal or
something like that.
You would think that when the modal is
popped up and your website is grayed out,
that the modal sort of becomes the whole
website as far as you're concerned.
And therefore, tabbing and shift tabbing
should only take you through the tabbable
elements in the modal itself, right?
Like you shouldn't be like tabbing all the
way back into the page, which is grayed
out because even though the page is
still there and the HTML is still live,
we're visually telling yo u that
we've grayed out the page and
the modal is the only thing important.
And so with workflows like this,
sometimes it's on us as developers to
add a little bit of JavaScript to make
sure that the sequential tabbing works
in the way that we would expect.
Because as far as the browser knows, we
still have all of those tabbable elements
on the core page itself as
well as all of these new ones.
And you could quickly get into a situation
where you tab down to the submit button,
and then you hit tab one more time, and
you're somewhere in the grayed
out website underneath.
And so this is like a common thing that
if you use like a CSS component library,
they'll almost always have tab
trapping built in with their modals.
Like, if you were to use Material UI or
Bootstrap or some React library,
they almost always have this built in.
But it is an important thing to consider,
especially if you're building your own
components, this is expected
behavior from users.